From: shniad@sfu.ca
Sent: 17 March 2005 00:22
To: shniad@sfu.ca
Subject: The greenbacks fall is stoking fears of a global crisis

http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7170226/site/newsweek/

Newsweek     March 21, 2005

Bottom Dollar 

The greenback’s fall is stoking fears of a global crisis. Behind the slide:
a world economy wildly out of balance

By Robert J. Samuelson

There’s been plenty of good news of late about the U.S. economy, so let’s
start with that: employment is expanding (2.4 million new payroll jobs in
the last year); inflation remains low (less than a 2 percent rate in the
past quarter); the stock market is higher (up 11 percent on the Dow from its
November low), and business investment is impressive (rising at a 14 percent
rate in late 2004). Indeed, the recent news has been so good—a major
exception being $50-a-barrel oil—that we’re hearing again of the
“Goldilocks” economy, which grows fast enough to increase jobs and slow
enough to muffle inflation. But beyond all the upbeat indicators lurks a
potentially frightening problem that unsettles even the wisest and most
seasoned economic observers. It’s not government budget deficits, a possible
housing bubble or even $2-a-gallon gasoline. It’s the dollar.

If you’ve been following closely, you know that the dollar has been
declining steadily against many foreign currencies. From recent
highs—reached in mid-2001 or early 2002—the dollar has dropped 38 percent
against the euro, 23 percent against the yen and 25 percent against the
Canadian dollar. And most economists expect the slide to continue. By the
year-end, the euro may rise to $1.45 from $1.34 and the yen to 97 from 104
(that’s 97 yen to the dollar), says economist Nariman Behravesh of Global
Insight. But, of course, you probably haven’t been following closely. For
most Americans, the subject of the dollar—its value on foreign-exchange
markets—is a yawner. A depreciating dollar makes foreign vacations more
expensive, puts pressure on the prices of imported cars and shoes and (the
good part) improves the global competitiveness of U.S. manufacturers.
Normally, these matters aren’t high on our “must know” list. But now is not
normal.

The significance of the dropping dollar is that it’s actually a symptom of a
larger and more troubling development. For 15 years the American economy has
been the engine for the world economy through ever-increasing trade and
current-account deficits (the current account includes other overseas
payments like travel and tourism). In 2004, the U.S. current-account deficit
is estimated to have reached $650 billion, a record 5.6 percent of the
economy (GDP). Other countries’ economies benefit from sending their goods
to eager American buyers, and the United States in turn sends massive
amounts of dollars abroad to pay for those goods. The trouble is that there
are now more dollars than foreigners want to hold. If there’s a glut of
anything—apples, computer chips, Beanie Babies—prices go down. So when
surplus dollars are sold for euros, yen or pounds, then the dollar drops in
value against those currencies.

If you sense a contradiction, you’re right; and there’s the dilemma. The
world economy can’t get along without our massive trade deficits—and perhaps
can’t get along with them, either. Americans’ consumption binge is propping
up global trade and employment, but it’s also threatening a financial
upheaval that could hurt global trade and employment. With their export
earnings, foreigners have bought huge amounts of U.S. stocks, bonds and
other investments: at the end of 2003, $1.8 trillion of corporate bonds and
$1.5 trillion of stocks. The doomsday scenario, considered unlikely by most
economists but not impossible, is that a crash of the dollar would trigger a
broader panic. Foreigners would sell their U.S. stocks and bonds, driving
down those markets and bringing massive losses to everyone. They would sell
because a dropping dollar would make their American investments worth less
in their own currencies. Consumer and business confidence would drop; a
recession in the United States and abroad might follow.

What’s especially unnerving is that no one knows how to disarm the dilemma.
If you think that some economist—or even Alan Greenspan—has a realistic
solution, think again. We’ve entered an unmapped forest; no one has been
here before. “We’ve never had the leading economic power with [such an
international] debt,” says economic historian Barry Eichengreen of the
University of California, Berkeley. The longer our huge trade deficits
continue, the stronger the underlying financial pressures become. Foreigners
either have to increase their holdings of U.S. stocks, bonds and other
assets, or they have to sell their dollars. But the real problem is the
dependence of so many other countries on the U.S. trade deficits for their
own economic growth. Their surpluses are the mirror images of our deficits.
In 2004, current-account surpluses were 3.7 percent of GDP in Japan, 2.3
percent in China, 2.9 percent in Germany, 6 percent in Taiwan and 7.8
percent in Belgium, estimates Economy.com.

It would be healthier for everyone if these big imbalances narrowed. On
paper, this is easy. Americans need to export more and to consume less. We
could raise taxes, decrease government spending and increase interest rates;
all those steps would dampen consumer spending and promote saving.
Meanwhile, the Asians could permit their currencies to rise against the
dollar—unlike the euro, China’s yuan and the currencies of many other Asian
countries are pegged to the dollar. That would make their exports to us more
expensive and our exports to them less expensive. Finally, the Europeans
could liberalize their markets and lower interest rates. Their economies
would grow faster. Taken together, this package would achieve what
economists call a “rebalancing’’ of world economic growth. The United States
would have an export-led expansion, not import-led consumption. Europeans
and Asians would produce more for themselves and buy more from us.

Unfortunately, this nifty bit of economic engineering has proved impossible
in practice. All those trade deficits and surpluses are not just economic
statistics: they also reflect national tastes and temperaments. Not
surprisingly, the economic policies the world needs have collided with local
politics.

Led by Japan, Asian countries have practiced export-led economic strategies
for decades. They’re loath to change, because they fear that anything else
won’t work. Japan’s own experience has only deepened its anxieties. In the
late 1980s, the yen rose and made Japan’s exports less competitive; ever
since, the country’s economy has languished (from 1994 to 2004, growth has
averaged a meager 1.5 percent). Not surprisingly, China has refused to
revalue the yuan, which has been at 8.28 to the dollar since 1994. Unless
the yuan is revalued, other Asian countries won’t raise their currencies
because they fear losing competitiveness to China, argues Fred Bergsten,
director of the Institute for International Economics (IIE) in Washington,
D.C.

As for Europeans and Americans, they’re also stuck. We Americans like to
shop. And we don’t like taxes and do like government benefits. Which is to
say: despite ritualistic denunciations of budget deficits, most Americans
find them preferable to the alternatives. In Europe, sluggish economic
growth (2.1 percent for the euro area from 1994 to 2004) reflects heavy
regulation and high taxes. In 2003, all taxes in the United States totaled
31 percent of GDP, reports the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, in Paris. By contrast, they were 50 percent of GDP in France,
45 percent in Germany and 46 percent in Italy. These three big continental
economies have been particular drags on Europe. Modest efforts to relax
regulations and reduce taxes have been highly controversial and haven’t yet
had much effect. In Germany, Chancellor Gerhard Schroder came into office in
1998 promising to reduce unemployment below 4 million; it recently passed
5.2 million, an unemployment rate of 12.6 percent.

The result is a global political stalemate that perpetuates a pattern of
world economic growth that might one day be highly damaging to all of us.
“It is a reality that [many] countries have a vested interest in a large and
chronic U.S. trade deficit,” writes Catherine Mann of the IIE. Similarly,
it’s been in the interest of most Americans (though not factory workers) to
be flooded with cheap foreign imports that also keep down the prices of
directly competitive American products. But these mutual interests could be
dangerously shortsighted. They exist only as long as foreigners willingly
invest their surplus export earnings in dollars. There’s no guarantee that
this will happen, because foreign exporters and investors aren’t necessarily
the same people. A foreign exporter may receive dollars and then sell them
for local currency (say, euros); then some other foreigner, perhaps a
pension fund, buys the dollars with euros and invests the dollars in
American stocks and bonds.

So the critical question becomes: can this arrangement survive? On that,
economists split into two polar camps—with many straddled in between.

One camp insists that it can survive, because it serves strong national
interests. Asian countries and particularly China need to create millions of
jobs for political and social stability. China also wants to attract foreign
investment in factories, because that brings new technologies and proven
management skills. The best way to do this (goes the theory) is to remain a
big exporter with a cheap currency. To prevent their currencies from rising
against the dollar, Asian countries will buy as many surplus greenbacks as
necessary. From year-end 1997 to year-end 2004, China’s foreign-exchange
reserves (invested heavily in U.S. Treasury securities) rose from $143
billion to $578 billion, South Korea’s from $20 billion to $199 billion and
Japan’s from $220 billion to $834 billion (although the yen floats, Japan
tries to limit its rise). And Americans also get a good deal: we send
foreigners pieces of paper—say, Treasury bonds—and get cars, clothes and
computer chips. Because everyone gains, the system can stay “intact for the
foreseeable future,” conclude economists Michael Dooley, Peter Garber and
David Folkerts-Landau of Deutsche Bank.

Not so, say other economists. The present situation is inherently unstable.
“The problem is that too many countries are required to prop up the United
States,” says Desmond Lachman of the American Enterprise Institute. Even if
Asians buy dollars, other government central banks (their equivalent of the
Federal Reserve) might sell. Or they might simply stop buying more dollars.
The present U.S. current-account deficit means that foreigners have to
increase their dollar holdings by almost $2 billion a day. A recent survey
by Central Banking Publications of 65 central banks—apparently not including
the Bank of Japan or the People’s Bank of China—found that two thirds were
moving away from dollars toward euros. Private investors could also desert
the dollar. Indeed, it’s vulnerable to almost any unpleasant surprise.
Consider what happened in late February when the Bank of Korea said it might
shift foreign-exchange reserves away from the dollar. Not only did the
dollar fall, but the Dow dropped 174 points. That’s precisely the sort of
chain reaction many economists fear. (The Bank of Korea later said its
statements had been misinterpreted.)

Perhaps the most prominent straddler is Alan Greenspan. In congressional
testimony and speeches, he has suggested that the present massive trade and
current-account deficits can’t continue indefinitely—but that their
reduction can be “orderly.” Translation: most ordinary people won’t notice,
because—through some messy combination of shifting exchange rates,
investment patterns and government policies—the world economy would
gradually move toward more balanced trade patterns without a major crisis.

This is certainly plausible. There are some favorable omens. Japan’s
moribund economy shows signs of improving. The dollar’s steep depreciation
against the euro hasn’t yet had any big impact on the U.S. stock and bond
markets. Finally, Asian countries may naturally produce more goods for their
own citizens, as expanding middle classes increase their consumption.
Economist Donald Straszheim reports that a major Chinese shoe manufacturer
plans to have 1,000 retail stores by 2008, up from 350 now. If the Chinese
and other Asians spend more at home, they’ll be less dependent on export-led
growth and more open to revaluing their currencies.

But the truth is that no one knows what will happen. Since World War II, the
dollar has been the major currency for global trade. It’s used for a lot of
two-way trade that never touches America. For example, about 80 percent of
Thailand’s and South Korea’s exports are sold in dollars, reports a Federal
Reserve study. Even in France and Germany, the dollar share of exports is
about a third. What this means is that, as long as the dollar plays this
global role, the United States doesn’t have to eliminate its trade and
current-account deficits. The world wants and needs dollars. Modest deficits
of perhaps 1 percent to 2 percent of GDP would provide them.

Whether we’ll get there any time soon is hard to say. One disappointment is
that the dollar’s recent depreciation hasn’t yet stopped the trade deficit
from growing. In theory, it should have: a cheaper dollar should make our
exports less expensive and our imports more expensive. Greenspan has offered
one explanation. Foreign exporters to the United States have reduced their
profit margins rather than raise prices and lose U.S. sales, he said.
Likewise, a cheaper dollar may have aided U.S. exporters only modestly.
Robert Piazza, president of Price Pump Co. in Sonoma, Calif., says that the
“dollar has helped in Europe”—but European exports represent only about 5
percent of the firm’s business.

Because the dollar is so important to the world, it’s inevitably an
instrument of U.S. foreign policy. This has long been true. After World War
II, Europe was short of dollars. The Marshall Plan provided the extra cash
that Europeans needed to buy food, fuel and machinery for reconstruction. In
the 1970s the dollar became a bone of contention, because President Richard
M. Nixon abandoned the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates—a system
that Europeans liked—and high U.S. inflation caused the dollar to depreciate
on exchange markets. The Europeans believed that both events destabilized
the world economy and put their exports at a disadvantage. If today’s dollar
problem turns ugly, there would almost certainly be a backlash from other
countries. Already, the Europeans feel abused, because—with most Asian
currencies pegged to the dollar—the euro has absorbed most of the
anti-dollar sentiment. People who want to sell dollars buy euros; the higher
euro weakens Europe’s export competitiveness and threatens even slower
economic growth.

Although the irritation and anger are understandable, they’re also
misleading. The real issue is whether the present pattern of global economic
growth is inherently unstable—and whether it can be easily corrected.
America’s huge and expanding trade deficits have served as a narcotic for
the rest of the world. As with all narcotics, resulting highs have been
artificial and, to some extent, delusional to both the dealer and the
addicts. The question now is whether everyone can go straight, before the
addiction becomes self-destructive. It is whether the Asians can curb their
export dependence; whether the Europeans can revitalize their economies;
whether the Americans can control their overconsumption. The dollar’s
fluctuations and frailties are mainly the outward manifestations of this
larger predicament. To paraphrase former Treasury secretary John Connally:
the dollar may be America’s currency, but it’s the world’s problem.

With Melinda Liu in Beijing


