From: NICOLAI GENTCHEV, BLOOMBERG/ NEWSROOM: [NGENTCHEV@bloomberg.net]
Sent: 17 December 2004 11:15
To: Alan Freeman
Subject: dollar/yuan

Follow Up Flag: Follow up
Flag Status: Flagged

Hi Alan

as a company we don't bother making independent predictions, we just report what  the various FX research units of investment banks say. I could forward you a 
few bits of research if you're interested.... it tends to get very geeky, unless  you're into reading about concepts such as 'sterilized central bank 
intervention'.   

I'm sure I didn't explain myself very well. It's a bit misleading to say 
central banks 'sell their currency'. You could just as accurately say they buy 
dollars and pays for them with their own currency.  

One difference between China & Japan is that while both run trade surpluses 
with the US, China has a problem with inflation while Japan has a problem with 
deflation. So China tends to want to drain yuan out of its economy (it's 
introducing capital controls as well as the first interest rate rise in 9 years)  while the Bank of Japan is pumping yen in and has interest rates at almost 
zero. 

Who buys the yuan that China prints? At the moment it's mostly Western 
companies. Brewers, carmakers, ad agencies, banks and all sorts of other 
companies are falling over themselves to invest in China, and paying quite 
inflated sums for acquisitions to enter the world's fastest growing major 
economy. These western companies need to buy yuan to do this. 

Both Japan & China have trade surplus with US. So at the end of a month (take as  an example this November) China had a 9.9 billion dollar surplus with the US. 
It can use this to buy 9.9 billion worth of US treasuries, or some other 
dollar-denominated assets.

Japan & China are now the no.1 and 2 holders of US government debt (bonds). They  thus have a vested interest in not sending the price of US bonds sharply lower.  It would devalue their own reserves. And of course they want to depress the 
value of their currencies to protect their exporters. 

One final thought... I'm a bit wary of whenever markets come to 'consensus'. 
Everyone believes the dollar will continue to fall. That suggests that this is a  sure fire one-way bet, but markets rarely work like that. What could cause a 
reversal? US interest rates have this week moved above euro area rates. Fed 
funds could be 4 or 5 percent by the end of 2005, while ECB rate rise seems a 
long way off given poor economic health of Germany & France. I'll forward you a 
contrarian article by a Bloomberg columnist on this theme. I'm not saying dollar  will rise next year, just that it might. If it was a sure fire bet, then 
marxists could put all their subs onto a put option on the dollar and make a 
killing. 

anyway, let me know what you think. And apologies for any geekyness... it's an 
occupational hazard here.



